BERT from R (#53)
rstudio/tensorflow-blog: _posts/2019-09-30-bert-r/bert_r.Rmd

reticulate::py_module_available('keras_bert')
```

```{r eval=F}
[1] TRUE
```

Finally, TensorFlow version should be 1.14/1.15. You can check it in the following form:

```{r eval=F}
tensorflow::tf_version()
```

```{r eval=F}
[1] ‘1.14’
```

In a nutshell:

```{r eval=F}
pip install keras-bert
pip install tensorflow==1.15
```

## What is BERT?

BERT^[[BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1810.04805.pdf)] is a pre-trained deep learning model introduced by Google AI Research which has been trained on Wikipedia and BooksCorpus. It has a unique way to understand the structure of a given text. Instead of reading the text from left to right or from right to left, BERT reads the entire word sequences at once. So, it allows to understanding a word based on its surroundings. There are different kind of pre-trained BERT models but the main difference between them is trained parameters. In our case, [BERT with 12-layers, 768-hidden, 12-heads, and 110M parameters](https://storage.googleapis.com/bert_models/2018_10_18/uncased_L-12_H-768_A-12.zip) will be used to create a text classification model.

## Model structure

> Loading a pre-trained BERT model is straightforward. [Downloaded zip file contains](https://storage.googleapis.com/bert_models/2018_10_18/uncased_L-12_H-768_A-12.zip):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Loading a pre-trained BERT model is straightforward. The [downloaded zip file] (https://storage.googleapis.com/bert_models/2018_10_18/uncased_L-12_H-768_A-12.zip) contains:
```

> - *bert_model.ckpt* which is for loading the weights from the TensorFlow checkpoint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *bert_model.ckpt*, which is for loading the weights from the TensorFlow checkpoint
```

> - *bert_config.json* which is a configuration file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *bert_config.json*, which is a configuration file
```

> - *vocab.txt* which is for text tokenization

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- *vocab.txt*, which is for text tokenization
```

```{r}
pretrained_path = '/Users/turgutabdullayev/Downloads/uncased_L-12_H-768_A-12'
config_path = file.path(pretrained_path, 'bert_config.json')
checkpoint_path = file.path(pretrained_path, 'bert_model.ckpt')
vocab_path = file.path(pretrained_path, 'vocab.txt')
```

## Import Keras-Bert module via reticulate

> Let's upload keras-bert via reticulate and prepare tokenizer object. BERT tokenizer will help us to turn words into indices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's load keras-bert via `reticulate` and prepare a tokenizer object. The BERT tokenizer will help us to turn words into indices.
```

```{r}
k_bert = import('keras_bert')
token_dict = k_bert$load_vocabulary(vocab_path)
tokenizer = k_bert$Tokenizer(token_dict)
```

> ### How tokenizer works?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### How does the tokenizer work?
```

> BERT uses a WordPiece tokenization strategy. If a word is Out-of-vocabulary (OOV), then BERT will break it down into subwords. (eating => eat, ##ing).

Reviewer: As the subsequent figure 1 is about embeddings, I'd add another (short) paragraph about what is going on with embeddings here.

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE, layout="l-body-outset", fig.cap = "[BERT input representation. The input embeddings are the sum of the token embeddings, the segmentation embeddings, and the position embeddings](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1810.04805.pdf)"}
knitr::include_graphics("images/emb.png")
```

## Define model parameters and column names

> Similar to Keras standard parameters: input length, batch size, epochs and learning rate should be defined for training a BERT model with Keras.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As usual with keras, the batch size, number of epochs and the learning rate should be defined for training BERT.
Additionally, the _sequence length_ is needed.
```

```{r}
seq_length = 50L
bch_size = 70
epochs = 1
learning_rate = 1e-4

DATA_COLUMN = 'comment_text'
LABEL_COLUMN = 'target'
```

> > Note: the max input length is 512 and it is extremely computational even for GPU. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note: the max input length is 512, and the model is extremely compute intensive even on GPU. 
```

## Load BERT model into R

> We can load the BERT model and automatically pad sequences with ```seq_len``` function. This is why using keras-bert^[[Implementation of the BERT. Official pre-trained models could be loaded for feature extraction and prediction](https://github.com/CyberZHG/keras-bert)] is a better choice, it makes the loading process very easy and comfortable.

Reviewer: The comparison here comes a bit out of the blue (better than what?)
I know what you mean, but most readers won't. I'd just leave that out (you can still emphasize how comfortable the process is.)

Author: I just removed comparison.

```{r}
model = k_bert$load_trained_model_from_checkpoint(
  config_path,
  checkpoint_path,
  training=T,
  trainable=T,
  seq_len=seq_length)

```

## Data structure, reading, preparation

> The dataset for this post is taken from [Kaggle Jigsaw Unintended Bias in Toxicity Classification competition](https://www.kaggle.com/c/jigsaw-unintended-bias-in-toxicity-classification).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The dataset for this post is taken from the [Kaggle Jigsaw Unintended Bias in Toxicity Classification competition](https://www.kaggle.com/c/jigsaw-unintended-bias-in-toxicity-classification).
```

> In order to prepare the dataset, we should write a preprocessing function which will read and tokenize data simultaneously. Then, we feed the outputs of the function as input for BERT model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to prepare the dataset, we write a preprocessing function which will read and tokenize data simultaneously. Then, we feed the outputs of the function as input for BERT model.
```

```{r}
# tokenize text
tokenize_fun = function(dataset) {
  c(indices, target, segments) %<-% list(list(),list(),list())
  for ( i in 1:nrow(dataset)) {
    c(indices_tok, segments_tok) %<-% tokenizer$encode(dataset[[DATA_COLUMN]][i], 
                                                       max_len=seq_length)
    indices = indices %>% append(list(as.matrix(indices_tok)))
    target = target %>% append(dataset[[LABEL_COLUMN]][i])
    segments = segments %>% append(list(as.matrix(segments_tok)))
  }
  return(list(indices,segments, target))
}
```

```{r}
# read data
dt_data = function(dir, rows_to_read){
  data = data.table::fread(dir, nrows=rows_to_read)
  c(x_train, x_segment, y_train) %<-% tokenize_fun(data)
  return(list(x_train, x_segment, y_train))
}
```

## Load dataset

> As we have already written the preprocess function, at first, it will read data, then add zeros and encode words into indices. Hence, we will have 3 output files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The way we have written the preprocess function, at first, it will read data, then add zeros and encode words into indices. Hence, we will have 3 output files:
```

- __x_train__ is input matrix for BERT
- __x_segment__ contains zeros for segment embeddings
- __y_train__ is the output target which we should predict

```{r}
c(x_train,x_segment, y_train) %<-% 
dt_data('~/Downloads/jigsaw-unintended-bias-in-toxicity-classification/train.csv',2000)
```

## Matrix format for Keras-Bert

> Data is in the list format. They need to be extracted and transposed. Then, the train and segment matrices should be placed into the list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The input data are in list format. They need to be extracted and transposed. Then, the train and segment matrices should be placed into the list.
```

```{r}
train = do.call(cbind,x_train) %>% t()
segments = do.call(cbind,x_segment) %>% t()
targets = do.call(cbind,y_train) %>% t()

concat = c(list(train ),list(segments))
```

## Calculate decay and warmup steps

> Adam optimizer with Warmpup helps to slower learning rate at the beginning of the training process. After certain training steps, the learning rate scheduler will gradually be increased because learning new data without warmup can harm BERT model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the Adam optimizer with warmup helps to lower the learning rate at the beginning of the training process. After certain training steps, the learning rate will gradually be increased, because learning new data without warmup can negatively affect a BERT model.
```

                                                            Encoder-12-FeedForward-Dropout
__________________________________________________________________________________________
Encoder-12-FeedForward-Norm  (None, 50, 768)     1536       Encoder-12-FeedForward-Add[0][
__________________________________________________________________________________________
Extract (Extract)            (None, 768)         0          Encoder-12-FeedForward-Norm[0]
__________________________________________________________________________________________
NSP-Dense (Dense)            (None, 768)         590592     Extract[0][0]                 
__________________________________________________________________________________________
output (Dense)               (None, 1)           769        NSP-Dense[0][0]               
==========================================================================================
Total params: 109,128,193
Trainable params: 109,128,193
Non-trainable params: 0
__________________________________________________________________________________________
```

## Compile model and begin training 

> If you have ever read [tensorflow blog](https://blogs.rstudio.com/tensorflow/), it means you are already familiar with Keras. Before training a model, we need to configure the learning process via the ```compile()``` function. And later with ```fit()``` function, we need to feed R matrices into BERT model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Aus usual with Keras, before training a model, we need to compile the model. And using ```fit()```, we feed it the R arrays.
```

```{r}
model %>% compile(
  k_bert$AdamWarmup(decay_steps=decay_steps, 
                    warmup_steps=warmup_steps, lr=learning_rate),
  loss = 'binary_crossentropy',
  metrics = 'accuracy'
)

model %>% fit(
  concat,
  targets,
  epochs=epochs,
  batch_size=bch_size, validation_split=0.2)
```

## Conclusion

> There are different methods of importing BERT model into R. But as always Keras provides us with a straightforward functionality that helps to load, train BERT model with a quick and an efficient way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this post, we've shown how we can use Keras to conveniently load, configure, and train a BERT model.
```

numpy_version:  1.16.4

NOTE: Python version was forced by use_python function
```

Luckily for us, a convenient way of importing BERT with Keras was created by Zhao HG. It is called [Keras-bert](https://github.com/CyberZHG/keras-bert). For us, this means that importing that same python library with `reticulate` will allow us to build a popular state-of-the-art model within R.

There are several methods to install keras-bert in Python. 

- in Jupyter Notebook, run:

```{r eval=FALSE}
!pip install keras-bert
```

- in Terminal (Linux, Mac OS), run:

```{r eval=FALSE}
python3 -m pip install keras-bert
```

- in Anaconda prompt (Windows), run:

```{r eval=FALSE}
conda install keras-bert
```

After this procedure, you can check whether keras-bert is installed or not.

```{r eval=F}
reticulate::py_module_available('keras_bert')
```

```{r eval=F}
[1] TRUE
```

Finally, the TensorFlow version used should be 1.14/1.15. You can check it in the following form:

```{r eval=F}
tensorflow::tf_version()
```

```{r eval=F}
[1] ‘1.14’
```

In a nutshell:

```{r eval=F}
pip install keras-bert
tensorflow::install_tensorflow(version = "1.15")
```

## What is BERT?

> BERT^[[BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1810.04805.pdf)] is a pre-trained deep learning model introduced by Google AI Research which has been trained on Wikipedia and BooksCorpus. It has a unique way to understand the structure of a given text. Instead of reading the text from left to right or from right to left, BERT via attention mechanism which is called Transformer encoder^[[Attention Is All You Need](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1706.03762.pdf)] reads the entire word sequences at once. So, it allows to understanding a word based on its surroundings. There are different kind of pre-trained BERT models but the main difference between them is trained parameters. In our case, [BERT](https://storage.googleapis.com/bert_models/2018_10_18/uncased_L-12_H-768_A-12.zip) with 12 encoder layers (Transformer Blocks), 768-hidden hidden units, 12-heads^[Attention — focuses on salient parts of input by taking a weighted average of them. 768 hidden units divided by 12 chunks and each chunk will have 64 output dimensions, afterward, the result from each chunk will be concatenated and forwarded to the next layer], and 110M parameters will be used to create a text classification model.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BERT^[[BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1810.04805.pdf)] is a pre-trained deep learning model introduced by Google AI Research which has been trained on Wikipedia and BooksCorpus. It has a unique way to understand the structure of a given text. Instead of reading the text from left to right or from right to left, BERT, using an attention mechanism which is called Transformer encoder^[[Attention Is All You Need](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1706.03762.pdf)], reads the entire word sequences at once. So, it allows to understanding a word based on its surroundings. There are different kind of pre-trained BERT models but the main difference between them is trained parameters. In our case, [BERT](https://storage.googleapis.com/bert_models/2018_10_18/uncased_L-12_H-768_A-12.zip) with 12 encoder layers (Transformer Blocks), 768-hidden hidden units, 12-heads^[Attention — focuses on salient parts of input by taking a weighted average of them. 768 hidden units divided by 12 chunks and each chunk will have 64 output dimensions, afterward, the result from each chunk will be concatenated and forwarded to the next layer], and 110M parameters will be used to create a text classification model.
```

```{r}
pretrained_path = '/Users/turgutabdullayev/Downloads/uncased_L-12_H-768_A-12'
config_path = file.path(pretrained_path, 'bert_config.json')
checkpoint_path = file.path(pretrained_path, 'bert_model.ckpt')
vocab_path = file.path(pretrained_path, 'vocab.txt')
```

## Import Keras-Bert module via reticulate

Let's load keras-bert via `reticulate` and prepare a tokenizer object. The BERT tokenizer will help us to turn words into indices.

```{r}
library(reticulate)
k_bert = import('keras_bert')
token_dict = k_bert$load_vocabulary(vocab_path)
tokenizer = k_bert$Tokenizer(token_dict)
```

### How does the tokenizer work?

BERT uses a WordPiece tokenization strategy. If a word is Out-of-vocabulary (OOV), then BERT will break it down into subwords. (eating => eat, ##ing).

```{r, eval=TRUE, echo=FALSE, layout="l-body-outset", fig.cap = "[BERT input representation. The input embeddings are the sum of the token embeddings, the segmentation embeddings, and the position embeddings](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1810.04805.pdf)"}
knitr::include_graphics("images/emb.png")
```
## Embedding Layers in BERT 

There are 3 types of embedding layers in BERT:

> - __Token Embeddings__, help to transform words into vector representations. In our model dimension size is 768.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- __Token Embeddings__ help to transform words into vector representations. In our model dimension size is 768.
```

> - __Segment Embeddings__, help to undersand the semantic similarity of different pieces of the text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- __Segment Embeddings__ help to understand the semantic similarity of different pieces of the text.
```

> - __Position Embeddings__, mean that identical words at different positions will not have the same output representation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- __Position Embeddings__ mean that identical words at different positions will not have the same output representation.
```
